So now that we've talked
about factory methods,
ways of creating streams
from different types
of data and data sources,
let's turn our attention
to aggregate operations.
And we're going
to talk about some
of the most common
aggregate operations.
And then we'll go and
go into more detail
about each of the
different classes
of aggregate operations.
So as we talked about
earlier, just a recap of what
I mentioned at the
very beginning,
an aggregate operation is
a higher-order function
that applies a behavior on
the elements of a stream.
And so a higher-order
function is just
a fancy name for a
function that's passed
a function as a parameter.
So in this particular case,
the aggregate operations
are going to be
passed parameters
that will be functions.
And these functions,
which are really
known as behaviors
in stream parlance,
are typically either going to
be lambda expressions or method
references to various
functional interfaces,
like the function
functional interface,
the predicate functional
interface, the consumer
functional interface, the
supplier functional interface,
and so on and so forth.
Aggregate operations
are very powerful,
because they help us define
a declarative pipeline that
focuses on what processing
we want to perform
rather than on how the
processing will be implemented.
And I always like
to visualize this
as an iceberg, where there's
a top part that's visible.
It's kind of the what.
And then there's a
bottom part, which
is really the bulk of the
iceberg, that's not visible.
That's the how.
And I think you'll
agree, especially
after the discussions we've
had of functional programming
in other courses
in this program,
that functional
programming is useful
because it helps you focus
on what you want to do,
not how it's done.
Now again, the how matters.
But we want the how to be an
implementation detail that's
bundled up in a framework,
not something that's
kind of the top level item.
Now, it turns out that
there are two types
of aggregate operations.
The first type are called
intermediate operations.
And these are operations that
process elements in their input
stream and then yield an
output stream as the result.
And there's a bunch of examples.
We've talked about
some of them already.
Briefly we'll cover them
a lot more here shortly.
Filter and map are ones
we've talked about already.
We haven't talked yet
about flatMap or much about
dropWhile.
We haven't talked
about takeWhile.
We'll cover those shortly.
Those are intermediate
operations.
They transform things
or filter things
and do some processing from
input stream to output stream.
Interestingly enough,
intermediate operations
are actually optional.
So it's actually possible to
go ahead and create a stream
and then just apply
something called a terminal
operation, which is the
other type of operation
we're about to talk about.
That's a pretty
rare thing to do.
But you can do it.
So here's an example where we
create a stream of character
names and then instantly
return the number of names
in the stream.
Interestingly enough, more
recent versions of Java
actually optimize
streams that contain
no intermediate operations.
They don't actually
create a stream at all.
They just go ahead
and, in this case,
just return the count
of the original list.
So they're obviously
clever things
the stream's framework does when
it detects certain use cases.
These intermediate
operations can
be further classified
according to
several different dimensions.
And we see them here.
One is whether the
operations are stateful.
And what that means
is, is the information
from a prior invocation used as
part of the future invocation?
And we'll see that
there's a number
of intermediate operations
where that is the case.
There's methods like
distinct, skip, sorted,
which have to know
what came before.
You obviously can't sort
the elements in a stream
unless you've seen
all the other elements
and stash them away someplace.
There's some other
operations that
are also going to be
stateful-like-- limit, which
has to keep track of how many
things you've already seen,
takeWhile, dropWhile, and so on.
We'll talk about those shortly.
There's also a bunch of
operations that are stateless.
So there's some stateless
intermediate operations
that don't store any information
for many prior invocations.
So these would include things
like filter, map, flatMap,
and so on.
As a general rule of
thumb, stateless operations
require a lot less processing
and memory resources
than stateful operations.
So you shouldn't avoid the
use of stateful operations.
Just think carefully about
how you're going to use them.
And consider whether
that's really
the way you need to
do things, because it
will take more time and
more space to do that,
because you have to buffer
up intermediate results.
The stream framework
has to buffer up
these intermediate
results on your behalf.
Yet another dimension
is run-to-completion.
And this means that these
intermediate operations
process all the elements
in the input stream
and then produce an
output stream that
contain all the results or
a subset of those results.
But all the elements in
the stream are processed.
So examples would be
things like sorted
again, which has to get all the
elements in order to sort them;
map, which does the
transformation; filter, which
processes all the elements
but doesn't necessarily
let them all go through;
flatMap; skip; distinct;
and so on.
And then the fourth
and final dimension
here are the so-called
short-circuiting operations.
And these are operations that
will make the stream operate
on a reduced size.
So classic examples of these
would be things like limit--
obviously once you've
reached the limit,
the stream processing ceases--
and then some other operations
like takeWhile and dropWhile
that we'll discuss
that take predicates,
and they either take
the data in the stream
as long as the
predicate is matched,
stopping when the predicate
is no longer matched.
Or they drop the
data in the stream
up until the predicate is
matched, at which point
they return a SubStream for
the remainder of the stream.
So you can see that
we can make basically
a table that cross-cuts
the stateful and stateless
dimension with the
run-to-completion and
short-circuiting dimension to
get various ways of classifying
these intermediate operations.
The second type of
aggregate operation,
which I've already hinted at,
are called terminal operations.
And these do two general
classes of things.
They trigger the intermediate
operations to run,
because streams are lazy.
And they also produce
a non-stream result,
meaning that they don't
create an output stream.
So examples of these would
be things like forEach,
reduce, collect, findAny,
various other kinds
of things that will match
any or none, and so on.
Always remember that a stream
has to have one, and only one,
terminal operation.
You can never have
more than one.
If you have more than
one, there's a bug.
If you-- because
it just won't work.
And if you have zero,
then it'll compile.
But you won't get any
behavior, because you
need to have the terminal
operation to trigger
the intermediate operations.
As with intermediate
operations, terminal operations
can also be classified
by several dimensions.
One of them is
run-to-completion.
And this means that the
terminating operation
will finish only after all
the elements in the stream
have been processed.
So examples of that would
be forEach, collect, reduce,
and so on.
And then there's also a bunch
of short-circuiting operations,
which may cause the stream
to terminate before all
the values are processed.
So these would
include operations
like allMatch, anyMatch,
findAny, findFirst, noneMatch,
and so on.
And as soon as something
violates the predicate,
then the processing stops.
So for example, if you do
allMatch and you find something
that doesn't match, no sense
in processing any further.
Likewise, findAny, once you
find anything that matches,
you're done.